Update wavlm.md to match new model card template (#40047)
huggingface/transformers: docs/source/en/model_doc/wavlm.md

-->

<div style="float: right;">
    <div class="flex flex-wrap space-x-1">
           <img alt="PyTorch" src="https://img.shields.io/badge/PyTorch-DE3412?style=flat&logo=pytorch&logoColor=white">
    </div>
</div>

# WavLM

> [WavLM](https://huggingface.co/papers/2110.13900) is a self-supervised speech representation model from Microsoft designed to work across the “full stack” of speech tasks, from automatic speech recognition (ASR) to speaker diarization and audio event detection. It builds on HuBERT’s masked prediction approach but introduces denoising and data augmentation to make the learned representations more robust in noisy and multi-speaker conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[WavLM](https://huggingface.co/papers/2110.13900) is a self-supervised speech representation model designed to work across the “full stack” of speech tasks, from automatic speech recognition (ASR) to speaker diarization and audio event detection. It builds on [HuBERTs](./hubert) masked prediction approach. It introduces gated relative position bias for better recognition accuracy and an unsupervised utterance-mixing strategy to improve speaker discrimination.
```

> You can find all the original WavLM checkpoints under the [WavLM](https://huggingface.co/models?other=wavlm) collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find all the original WavLM checkpoints under the [Microsoft](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/models?search=wavlm) organization.
```

> [!TIP]
> This model was contributed by [patrickvonplaten](https://huggingface.co/patrickvonplaten).
>
> Click on the WavLM models in the right sidebar for more examples of how to apply WavLM to different audio tasks.

> The example below demonstrates how to extract audio features with [`Pipeline`] or the [`AutoModel`] class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example below demonstrates how to automatically transcribe speech into text with [`Pipeline`] or the [`AutoModel`] class.
```

<hfoptions id="usage">
<hfoption id="Pipeline">

> ```python

Reviewer: ```py
import torch
from transformers import pipeline

pipeline = pipeline(
    task="automatic-speech-recognition",
    model="patrickvonplaten/wavlm-libri-clean-100h-base-plus",
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
    device=0
)

pipeline("https://huggingface.co/datasets/Narsil/asr_dummy/resolve/main/1.flac")
```

import torch
from transformers import pipeline

pipe = pipeline(
    task="feature-extraction",
    model="microsoft/wavlm-base",
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
    device=0
)

features = pipe("https://huggingface.co/datasets/Narsil/asr_dummy/resolve/main/1.flac")
print(features)
```

</hfoption>
<hfoption id="AutoModel">

```python

> import torch

Reviewer: ```py
from transformers import AutoProcessor, AutoModelForCTC
from datasets import load_dataset
import torch

dataset = load_dataset("hf-internal-testing/librispeech_asr_demo", "clean", split="validation")
dataset = dataset.sort("id")
sampling_rate = dataset.features["audio"].sampling_rate

processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained("patrickvonplaten/wavlm-libri-clean-100h-base-plus")
model = AutoModelForCTC.from_pretrained("patrickvonplaten/wavlm-libri-clean-100h-base-plus", torch_dtype=torch.float16)

# audio file is decoded on the fly
inputs = processor(dataset[0]["audio"]["array"], sampling_rate=sampling_rate, return_tensors="pt")
with torch.no_grad():
    logits = model(**inputs).logits
predicted_ids = torch.argmax(logits, dim=-1)

# transcribe speech
transcription = processor.batch_decode(predicted_ids)
transcription[0]
```

from transformers import AutoProcessor, AutoModel

processor = AutoProcessor.from_pretrained("microsoft/wavlm-base")
model = AutoModel.from_pretrained(
    "microsoft/wavlm-base",
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
    device_map="auto"
)

audio_url = "https://huggingface.co/datasets/Narsil/asr_dummy/resolve/main/1.flac"
inputs = processor(audio_url, return_tensors="pt")
with torch.no_grad():
    outputs = model(**inputs)
print(outputs.last_hidden_state)
```

</hfoption>
</hfoptions>

> Quantization reduces the memory burden of large models by representing the weights in a lower precision. 

Reviewer: The model is not that large so we can remove the Quantization section

Refer to the [Quantization](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/quantization/overview) overview for more available quantization backends.

The example below uses [bitsandbytes](../quantization/bitsandbytes) to quantize the weights to 4-bits.

```python
from transformers import WavLMForCTC, BitsAndBytesConfig

bnb_config = BitsAndBytesConfig(
    load_in_8bit=True,
    llm_int8_threshold=6.0
)

model = WavLMForCTC.from_pretrained(
    "microsoft/wavlm-large",
    quantization_config=bnb_config,
    device_map="auto"
)
```

## Notes

> - WavLM processes raw 16kHz audio waveforms provided as 1D float arrays. Use `Wav2Vec2Processor` for preprocessing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- WavLM processes raw 16kHz audio waveforms provided as 1D float arrays. Use [`Wav2Vec2Processor`] for preprocessing.
```

> - For CTC-based fine-tuning, model outputs should be decoded with `Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For CTC-based fine-tuning, model outputs should be decoded with [`Wav2Vec2CTCTokenizer`].
```

> - The model works particularly well for tasks like speaker verification, identification, and diarization.
> 
> ## Resources
> - [Audio classification task guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/tasks/audio_classification)
> - [Automatic speech recognition task guide](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/tasks/asr)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
